docs: ADR-007: Bad Debt (#287)
umee-network/umee: docs/architecture/ADR-007-bad-debt.md

The function `RepayBadDebt(borrowerAddress)` immediately repays any remaining borrows on the address in question, or repays the maximum available amount for any borrowed asset denomination where the borrowed amount exceeds available reserves.

### Recovery from Exhausted Reserves

When `RepayBadDebt(borrowerAddress)` fails to repay a borrow in full due to insufficient reserves, it stores information about the borrower and denomination in question so repayment can be completed later.

```go
// pseudocode
// store a list of denominations with nonzero bad debt
badDebtDenomPrefix | tokenDenom = true
// store a list of borrow addresses with bad debt, sorted by denom
badDebtAddressPrefix | lengthPrefixed(tokenDenom) | borrowerAddress = true
```

Then, every `InterestEpoch`, bad debt positions can be iterated through and repaid as reserves become available. Any `denom|address` that is fully repaid is cleared from the list, as well any `denom` which no longer has any associated bad debt addresses.

> Keeping a list of denominations in addition to addresses enables the iteration to efficiently skip denoms whose reserves are still zero, thus only reading addresses with bad debt that can actually be repaid at the time.

Author: New section added to solve edge case

# ADR 005: Liquidation

## Changelog

- December 10, 2021: Initial Draft (@toteki)

## Status

Proposed

## Context

> Debt positions on Umee always start out overcollateralized, but if sufficient interest accrues or asset prices fluctuate too quickly, some borrowers may reach a state where the total value of their collateral is less than the value of their borrowed assets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Debt positions on Umee always start out over-collateralized, but if sufficient interest accrues or asset prices fluctuate too quickly, some borrowers may reach a state where the total value of their collateral is less than the value of their borrowed assets.
```

> Such debt (now undercollateralized) may become overcollateralized on its own if asset prices rebound in the right direction, but it is also eligible for liquidation in its current state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Such debt (now under-collateralized) may become over-collateralized on its own if asset prices rebound in the right direction, but it is also eligible for liquidation in its current state.
```

> When fully liquidated, undercollateralized debt will result in an account with nonzero total borrows but zero collateral, thus no incentive for repayment.

Author: Clarified that they are not just past their borrow limit, but exceeding their collateral value.

> When fully liquidated, undercollateralized debt will result in an account with nonzero total borrows but zero collateral, thus no incentive for repayment. 

Author: ```suggestion

When fully liquidated, undercollateralized debt will result in an account with nonzero total borrows but zero collateral, thus no incentive for repayment. 
```

> When fully liquidated, undercollateralized debt will result in an account with nonzero total borrows but zero collateral, thus no incentive for repayment.

Author: ```suggestion
When fully liquidated, accounts whose `BorrowedValue` is greater than `CollateralValue` (adjusted for liquidation incentive) will result in an account with nonzero total borrows but zero collateral, thus no incentive for repayment.
```
This clarifies that they are not just past their borrow limit, but exceeding their collateral value.

It is in the interests of the overall system to repay such _bad debt_ using reserves, in order to prevent it accruing interest forever and damaging the health of the lending pool.

## Alternatives

### Repayment Eligibility Condition

One consideration to make is whether borrowers should be eligible for bad debt repayment whenever `Collateral Value < Borrow Value`, or if eligibility should be delayed until `Collateral Value == 0`.

In the former case, the system would also confiscate any remaining collateral, as though it were a liquidator, and would have to process the collateral in a way of our choosing (e.g. exchange for base assets, and add them to reserves).

In the latter case, liquidators would first have liquidate the portion of the debt that can be exchanged for collateral, reducing the total burden on reserves when the borrow is being repaid.

> Also in the latter case, if liquidators do not (for whatever reason) liquidate until the undercollateralized account's collateral is zero, its borrows would continue to accrue interest and remain ineligible for bad debt repayment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also in the latter case, if liquidators do not (for whatever reason) liquidate until the under-collateralized account's collateral is zero, its borrows would continue to accrue interest and remain ineligible for bad debt repayment.
```

This should not be a common case, as long as liquidation incentives exist, but might happen if liquidators are sparse, or if the remaining collateral is so small that it is not worth the gas fee to retrieve.

### Checking for Repayment Eligibility

A second consideration is when to check for borrowers eligibility for bad debt repayment. The two likely options are immediately during `LiquidateBorrow`, or during `EndBlock` every `InterestEpoch`. A third option might be to check periodically, but on a separately controlled interval `BadDebtRepayEpoch`.

> The advantage of an immediate check during `LiquidateBorrow` is that only the borrow being liquidated needs to be checked for eligibility, instead of periodically iterating over all borrows. Additioanlly, `CollateralValue` has already been calculated in that function.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The advantage of an immediate check during `LiquidateBorrow` is that only the borrow being liquidated needs to be checked for eligibility, instead of periodically iterating over all borrows. Additionally, `CollateralValue` has already been calculated in that function.
```

However, there is an edge case (reserve exhaustion) where borrows eligible for reserve-driven-repayment during their final liquidation, cannot be fully repaid at that moment.
If using an immediate check during `LiquidateBorrow`, there would be no future liquidation against that address to trigger bad debt repayment after reserves recovered - the debt would accrue interest indefinitely.

> Also note that the fist decision on the condition for bad debt repayment eligibility changes the effectiveness of these options:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also note that the first decision on the condition for bad debt repayment eligibility changes the effectiveness of these options:
```

> - A condition of `Collateral Value == 0` favors checks during `LiquidateBorrow`. because liquidation is the only action on undercollateralized accounts that is allowed to reduce collateral to zero.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A condition of `Collateral Value == 0` favors checks during `LiquidateBorrow`, because liquidation is the only action on under-collateralized accounts that is allowed to reduce collateral to zero.
```

### Edge Cases

There are two edge cases that would allow bad debt to slip past detection or automatic repayment:

- Nonzero collateral: If liquidators do not reduce borrower collateral to zero, even leaving a miniscule amount, bad debt will not be detected at the end of `LiquidateBorrow`.

This could be solved by any Liquidator - but if undercollateralized borrowers are being left for long periods without being completely liquidated, then a bot could be set up to finish them, even if that bot is controlled by Umee.

- Reserve exhaustion: If reserves are insufficient to fully repay bad debt at the moment `RepayBadDebt` is called, the remaining debt will not be targeted again (as with zero collateral, no `LiquidateBorrow` will occur int he future).

An additional trick could be used in the case of reserve exhaustion: If transfer of uTokens is permitted, sending a miniscule amount of uTokens to an address with zero collateral would make it eligible for liquidation again, whereupon its bad debt would be detected and repaid.

If reserve exhaustion is deemed sufficiently rare, then it might be enough to have this trick available should the need for it arise.

> Otherwise, a very infrequent periodic check could be created to detect address the case automatically, or a message type that could be manually used to flag bad debt for repayment.

Reviewer: It doesn't seem to me that the "trick" to address the 2nd edge-case is sufficient. It just seems way too inferior and hacky.

I would opt to use some sort of automatic system. Perhaps infrequent periodic checks during BeginBlock or EndBlock.

Author: See updates - solution proposed and review re-requested.
